Control Plane Agent POC with dapr (#57)
kyma-project/control-plane: docs/internal/investigations/remote-runtime-configuration-dapr/poc/dapr-poc-scenario.md

Configuration for these sidecars can be held in one central place, from where Kyma Runtimes could fetch them and configure the
sidecars accordingly.

## Known issues

Dapr sidecars need a restart to apply changes in configuration. We are still waiting for the decision on the Dapr side if
they will stay with that approach.

## PoC scenario

The scenario will present two Runtimes using [Dapr State API](https://github.com/dapr/docs/blob/master/reference/api/state_api.md) to persist the state in two different Redis instances.

1. Control Plane admin sets the configuration for two Runtimes.
2. Runtime Agents from both Runtimes fetch the configuration and create the Dapr Component resources.
3. Control Plane admin changes the configuration.
4. Agents fetch the new configuration, apply it, and restart the Pods.
5. Both Runtimes use the new configuration.

As it's the Proof of Concept stage, we can use some temporary solutions, such as:
- Configuration held in memory instead of a database
- Pods being restarted by the Agent instead of a more complex solution

### Initial architecture

> ![Initial Architecture Diagram](./stage-1.svg)

Author: OK, as you say those diagrams are more readable with that color chemes then I convert them.

The image depicts the initial configuration of the components which will be deployed.

Tools:

> - docker [https://www.docker.com/](https://www.docker.com/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Docker [https://www.docker.com/](https://www.docker.com/)
```

- k3d v3 [https://github.com/rancher/k3d](https://github.com/rancher/k3d)
- kubectl [https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)

> - helm 3 [https://helm.sh/](https://helm.sh/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Helm 3 [https://helm.sh/](https://helm.sh/)
```

- watch (`brew install watch`)

Ensure you have all the tools installed and start in the `poc` directory.

> > NOTE: Please keep in mind that some shells automatically escape some characters when copying and pasting commands. Always check the command before running it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**NOTE:** Please keep in mind that some shells automatically skip some characters when copying and pasting commands. Always check the command before running it.
```

Author: FIne with bold, but the characters are escaped with an escape character, not skipped.

### Control Plane deployment

In the first step, we deploy the Control Plane cluster which hosts the Runtime Governor component as well as two Redis instances for the purpose of persisting the state by the Runtimes.

> To deploy the Control Plane cluster run the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy the Control Plane cluster, run the following command:
```

```
$ ./setup-cp.sh
```

> You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of the pods being deployed in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of Pods that are deployed in the cluster:
```

```
$ watch kubectl --context=k3d-cp get po --all-namespaces
```

### Runtimes deployment

> The next step is to deploy two runtimes that will consume the Control Plane API and persist the state in the Redis instances configured by the central Control Plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is to deploy two Runtimes that will consume the Control Plane API and persist the state in the Redis instances configured by the central Control Plane.
```

> To deploy the first Runtime cluster run the following command. It will create the cluster and deploy a basic set of components including the NodeApp that demo the use-case with the state store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy the first Runtime cluster, run the following command. It will create the cluster and deploy a basic set of components including the NodeApp that demos the use-case with the state store.
```

```
$ ./setup-runtime1.sh
```

> You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of the pods being deployed in the cluster. On that stage, there should be NodeApp Pod deployed but the Dapr sidecar should not be injected yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of Pods that are deployed in the cluster. On that stage, there should be NodeApp Pod deployed but the Dapr sidecar should not be injected yet.
```

```
$ watch kubectl --context=k3d-runtime1 get po --all-namespaces
```

> Next, deploy the agent component using the following command. It will deploy the agent that connects to the Control Plane cluster and fetches the configuration for the given runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, deploy the Runtime Agent component using the following command. It will deploy the Runtime Agent that connects to the Control Plane cluster and fetches the configuration for the given Runtime.
```

```
$ ./setup-runtime1-agent.sh
```

> You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of the pods being deployed in the cluster. After a successful deployment of the agent component, it should fetch the configuration and apply it to the cluster. The NodeApp pod should be recreated with the Dapr sidecar injected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of Pods that are deployed in the cluster. After a successful deployment of the Runtime Agent component, it should fetch the configuration and apply it to the cluster. The NodeApp Pod should be recreated with the Dapr sidecar injected.
```

```
$ watch kubectl --context=k3d-runtime1 get po --all-namespaces
```

> In order to run the second runtime cluster please run all the above steps using `runtime2` scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to run the second Runtime cluster, run all the previous steps using the `runtime2` scripts.
```

### Use-case scenario

> The setup described gives you the possibility to interact with two runtime clusters. On both runtimes, there is an example Dapr NodeApp deployed. It exposes two endpoints `/order`, and `/neworder` which interacts with the Redis state store. You can call those endpoints using the docker container run in the same docker network as the clusters are running. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The setup described gives you the possibility to interact with two Runtime clusters. On both runtimes, there is an example Dapr NodeApp deployed. It exposes two endpoints called `/order` and `/neworder` which interact with the Redis state store. You can call those endpoints using a Docker container running in the same Docker network as the clusters. 
```

> You can call `/order` endpoint of the runtime1 and runtime2, running the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can call the `/order` endpoint of the Runtime1 and Runtime2 by running the following commands:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```bash
```

// Runtime 1

> $ docker run --network=cpnet --rm --entrypoint curl curlimages/curl -iv http://${$(docker inspect k3d-runtime1-server-0 --format='{{json .NetworkSettings.Networks.cpnet.IPAddress}}')//\"}/order

Reviewer 2: I think that according to the guidelines the `$` sign at the beginning should be removed

Author: That's a pity, but I'll remove it.

// Runtime 2
$ docker run --network=cpnet --rm --entrypoint curl curlimages/curl -iv http://${$(docker inspect k3d-runtime2-server-0 --format='{{json .NetworkSettings.Networks.cpnet.IPAddress}}')//\"}/order
```

> In order to call `/neworder` endpoint you need to send the POST request with the JSON in the body, here are the example calls for the runtime1 and runtime2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to call the `/neworder` endpoint, send the POST request with the JSON in the body. See the example of such calls for the Runtime1 and Runtime2:
```

```
// Runtime 1
$ docker run --network=cpnet --rm --entrypoint curl curlimages/curl -iv http://${$(docker inspect k3d-runtime1-server-0 --format='{{json .NetworkSettings.Networks.cpnet.IPAddress}}')//\"}/neworder -d '{"data": {"orderId":"foo"}}' -H "Content-Type: application/json"

// Runtime 2
$ docker run --network=cpnet --rm --entrypoint curl curlimages/curl -iv http://${$(docker inspect k3d-runtime2-server-0 --format='{{json .NetworkSettings.Networks.cpnet.IPAddress}}')//\"}/neworder -d '{"data": {"orderId":"bar"}}' -H "Content-Type: application/json"
```

> To prove that the runtime configuration can be dynamically reloaded, now you can change the configuration for the runtime2 to point to the redis1 instance. In order to do that run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prove that the Runtime configuration can be dynamically reloaded, change the configuration for the Runtime2 to point to the Redis1 instance. In order to do so, run the following command:
```

```
$ REDIS1_PASSWORD=$(kubectl --context=k3d-cp get secret -n redis1-system redis -ojsonpath='{.data.redis-password}' | base64 -d) helm --kube-context=k3d-cp upgrade -i cp-poc -n cp-poc ./control-plane/chart \
  --set redis1.host=${CP_IPADDR//\"}:30000 --set redis1.password=$REDIS1_PASSWORD \
  --set redis2.host=${CP_IPADDR//\"}:30000 --set redis2.password=$REDIS1_PASSWORD
```

> Now you can watch how the configuration will be reloaded by the agent on the Runtime2. The NodeApp pod should be restarted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can watch how the configuration is reloaded by the Runtime Agent on the Runtime2. The NodeApp Pod should be restarted.
```

```
$ watch kubectl --context=k3d-runtime2 get po --all-namespaces
```

> After the successful reconfiguration the architecture will look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the successful reconfiguration, the architecture looks as follows:
```

![Initial Architecture Diagram](./stage-2.svg)

### Cleanup

> To clean up the POC environment use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To clean up the POC environment, use the following command:
```

1. Control Plane admin sets the configuration for two Runtimes.
2. Runtime Agents from both Runtimes fetch the configuration and create the Dapr Component resources.
3. Control Plane admin changes the configuration.
4. Agents fetch the new configuration, apply it, and restart the Pods.
5. Both Runtimes use the new configuration.

As it's the Proof of Concept stage, we can use some temporary solutions, such as:
- Configuration held in memory instead of a database
- Pods being restarted by the Agent instead of a more complex solution

### Initial architecture

![Initial Architecture Diagram](./stage-1.svg)

The image depcts the initial configuration of the components which will be deployed.

Tools:
- docker [https://www.docker.com/](https://www.docker.com/)
- k3d v3 [https://github.com/rancher/k3d](https://github.com/rancher/k3d)
- kubectl [https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/)
- helm 3 [https://helm.sh/](https://helm.sh/)

### Control Plane deployment

> In the first step we deploy the Control Plane cluster which hosts the Runtime Director component as well as two Redis instances for the purpose of persising the state by the Runtimes.

Reviewer 3: Please let user know from which directory it should start to call scripts

To deploy the Control Plane cluster run the follwing command
```

> ./setup-cp.md

Reviewer 3: .sh

To deploy the first Runtime cluster run the following command. It will create the cluster and deploy a basic set of components including the nodeapp that demoes the use-case with the state store.
```
./setup-runtime1.sh
```

You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of the pods being deployed in the cluster. On that stage there should be nodeapp pod deployed but the Dapr sidecar should not be injected yet.

```
watch kubectl --context=k3d-runtime1 get po --all-namespaces
```

Next, deploy the agent component using the following command. It will deploy the agent that connects to the Control Plane cluster and fetches the configuration for the given runtime.

```
./setup-runtime1-agent.sh
```

You can watch the installation progress by looking at the statuses of the pods being deployed in the cluster. After successful deployment of the agent component it should fetch the confgiuration and apply it on the cluster. The nodeapp pod should be recreated with the Dapr sidecar injected.

```
watch kubectl --context=k3d-runtime1 get po --all-namespaces
```

> In order to run second runtime cluster please run all aboved steps using `runtime2` scripts.

Reviewer 3: could we add a short chapter with resetup-runtime1.sh that will switch to redis2? I understand we dont need to resetup agent1 right?
